.. http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Using+The+Aggregation+Framework+with+The+Java+Driver WRITING-114

.. _java-driver-and-aggregation-framework:

=====================================
Java Driver and Aggregation Framework
=====================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

Release 2.2.0 of MongoDB introduces the aggregation framework. Designed
to be both performant and easy to use, the aggregation framework
calculates aggregate values, (such as counts, totals and averages),
without the need for complex map-reduce operations. The aggregation
framework is both multithreaded and written in C++, thus it executes
natively across nodes.

Aggregation tasks are built around the concept of the aggregation
pipeline. Just as UNIX-like shells use the pipe operator ``|`` to
connect a series of command-line operations together, the aggregation
framework passes documents through a pipeline of operations which
transform these objects as they go. Version 2.9.0 of the Java driver
provides a new helper method, ``DBCollection.aggregate()`` which can be
used to create aggregation tasks.

Let’s use a simple example to demonstrate how the aggregation helper
works. Suppose I am using MongoDB to store my employee’s travel
expenses. I’ve created a collection named ``expenses``, which store
individual expenses by employee and by department. Here’s a sample
document:

.. code-block:: javascript

   {  "_id" : ObjectId("503d5024ff9038cdbfcc9da4"),
      "employee" : 61,
      "department" : "Sales",
      "amount" : 77,
      "type" : "airfare"
   }

I am auditing three departments: Sales, Engineering and Human
Resources. I want to calculate each department’s average spend on
airfare. I’d like to use the Aggregation Framework for the audit, so I
think of the operation in terms of a pipeline:

.. TODO? put back image? Saved the original image from wiki in
   images/java-driver-using-agg-framework-PipelineOperationsAbstract.png

#. Operation: Match documents where ``type`` = ``"airfare"``; then pipe into

#. Operation: Pass only the ``department`` and the ``amount`` fields
   through the pipeline; then pipe into

#. Operation: Average the expense ``amount``, grouped by ``department``.

I will use the aggregation operators ``$match``, ``$project`` and
``$group`` to perform each operation. Individual aggregation operations
can be expressed as JSON objects, so I can think of my pipeline in JSON
as:

.. TODO? pug back image? Saved the original image from wiki in
   images/java-driver-using-agg-framework-PipelineOperationsJSON.png

#. First operation:

   .. code-block:: javascript

      $match: { type: "airfare"}

#. Piped into:

   .. code-block:: javascript

      $project: { department: 1, amount: 1 } 

#. Piped into:

   .. code-block:: javascript

      $group: { _id: "$department",
                average: { $avg: "$amount" } }

I use the Java Driver’s aggregation helper to build out this pipeline
in my application. Let’s take a look at the ``aggregate()`` method
signature.

.. code-block:: java

   public AggregationOutput aggregate( DBObject firstOp, DBObject ... additionalOps)

The ``aggregate()`` method uses Java ``varargs`` and accepts arbitrary
number of ``DBObjects`` as parameters. These ``DBObjects`` represent
aggregation operations, which will be chained together by the helper
method to form the aggregation pipeline. Callers of the ``aggregate()``
method must pass at least one aggregation operation. Here’s the Java
code we’ll use to perform the aggregation task:

.. code-block:: java

   // create our pipeline operations, first with the $match
   DBObject match = new BasicDBObject("$match", new BasicDBObject("type", "airfare") );

   // build the $projection operation
   DBObject fields = new BasicDBObject("department", 1);
   fields.put("amount", 1);
   fields.put("_id", 0);
   DBObject project = new BasicDBObject("$project", fields );

   // Now the $group operation
   DBObject groupFields = new BasicDBObject( "_id", "$department");
   groupFields.put("average", new BasicDBObject( "$avg", "$amount"));
   DBObject group = new BasicDBObject("$group", groupFields);

   // run aggregation
   AggregationOutput output = collection.aggregate( match, project, group );

Aggregations are executed as database commands in MongoDB. These
commands embed the results of the aggregation task in an object that
also contains additional information about how the command was
executed. The return value of ``aggregate()`` is an instance of the
``AggregationOutput`` class, which provides assessors to this
information.

.. code-block:: java

   public Iterable<DBObject> results()
   public CommandResult getCommandResult
   public DBObject getCommand()

Let’s take a look at the results of my audit:

.. code-block:: java

   System.out.println(output);

.. code-block:: sh

   { 
      "serverUsed" : "/127.0.0.1:27017" , 
      "result" : [
         {"_id" : "Human Resources" , "average" : 74.91735537190083} , 
         {"_id" : "Sales" , "average" : 72.30275229357798} ,
         {"_id" : "Engineering" , "average" : 74.1}
      ] ,
      "ok" : 1.0
   }
